Prayer to Khandro Tsering Chödrön
by Orgyen Tobgyal Rinpoche

namo gurawé
Homage to the lama!
chitar tsangpé bumo yangchenma
Outwardly, you are Sarasvatī, the daughter of Brahmā,
nangtar arya taré mimö zuk
Inwardly, you are the youthful lady Tārā,
sangwa lhenkyé benza barahi
Secretly, you are the innate Vajravārāhī,
kündü lakar daki gyal gyur chik
You who embody them all—ḍākinī of the Lakar family—may you reign supreme!

orgyen dü sum khyenpé dorjé ka
The great master of Orgyen knows all past, present and future, and with his vajra words
ter jin drubpé khorlö gyur nam kyi
The revealers of the terma treasures, those universal kings of realization,
shelkar dorjé tso yi namtrul du
Have praised you in their predictions, undisputed,
tsömé lung gi ngak la solwa deb
As the emanation of Shelkar Dorje Tso1—and so to you I pray!

dorjé lung gi zinpa jishyin du
Just as they foretold in their vajra prophecies,
tab chok pema yeshe dorjé yi
You joined Padma Yeshe Dorje,2 supreme embodiment of skilful means,
sherab tongpé chakgyar nyam jorwé
As the consort symbolizing wisdom and emptiness—
dechen ga shyi dakmor solwa deb
Lady of great bliss, granter of the four joys, to you I pray!

lama yabyum yermé mögü kyi
Moved by a devotion so deep that I perceive lama and consort as indivisible,
nying né solwa debpé gangzak la
From the core of my heart I pray: on such a person as me
detong tsendali yi gyü kul té
Grant your blessings, so that the bliss-emptiness of caṇḍāli is invoked,
dé drö yeshe barwar jin gyi lob
And the blissful warmth and wisdom are set ablaze!

detar solwa tabpé jinlab kyi
Through the blessings of such a prayer as this,
lona dampé chö su drowa dang
May my mind be turned towards the Dharma,
chö yang lam long trulnang yeshe su
May Dharma progress along the path, and, as delusory appearances
dak né changchub sem chok jongwar shok
Are purified into wisdom, may I come to master the bodhicitta supreme!

kyé dang tserab küntu tukjé zung
In this and all my future lives, hold me in your compassion!
dü dang nampa küntu jingyi lob
At all times and in any situation, grant me your blessing, I pray!
dichi bardö nekab tamché du
For in this life, the next and in the bardo state,
resa khyé le mé do jetsünma
O Jetsünma, there is no other source of hope for me but you!

When the supreme Khandro Tsering Chödrön was absorbed into the expanse of primordial purity,
the youthful vase body, one who joyfully seeks her protection, Orgyen Tobgyal, made this
prayer of whatever came into his mind and then, some days later, had it inscribed on a sheet
of white paper.

↑ Shelkar Dorje Tso was a consort and disciple of Guru Rinpoche, who attained realization and
miraculous abilities, such as the power to fly through the sky.↑ The secret name of Jamyang
Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö, which he received from Dodrupchen Jikme Tenpe Nyima during an empowerment
of Rigdzin Düpa.